9.3: Operation With File
First we will see how files are opened and closed. A file can be defined by
following class ifstream, ofstream, fstream, all these are defined in
fstream.h header file.
if a file object is declared by ifstream class, then that object can be
used for reading from a file.
if a file object is declared by ofstream class, then that object can
be used for writing onto a file.
If a file object is declared by fstream class then, that object can be
used for both reading from and writing to a file.
​9.3 የፋይል ኦፕሬሽኖች (Operations With File)
​በመጀመሪያ ፋይሎች እንዴት እንደሚከፈቱና እንደሚዘጉ እንይ። አንድን ፋይል በፕሮግራማችን ለመጠቀም በ fstream.h ውስጥ የሚገኙትን እነዚህን ሶስት ክላሶች እንጠቀማለን፡
​ifstream: የዚህ ክላስ ኦብጀክት (object) ከፈጠርክ፣ ፋይሉን ለማንበብ ብቻ ነው የምትጠቀመው (Input)።
​ofstream: የዚህ ክላስ ኦብጀክት ደግሞ በፋይሉ ላይ መረጃ ለመጻፍ ይጠቅማል (Output)።
​fstream: ይሄኛው ደግሞ ሁለቱንም በአንድ ላይ ያደርጋል፤ ማለትም ከፋይሉ ለማንበብም ሆነ በፋይሉ ላይ ለመጻፍ ያስችልሃል።
9.4: Types of Disk File Access
Your program can access files either in sequential manner or random
manner. The access mode of a file determines how one can read, write,
change, add and delete data from a file.
A sequential file has to be accessed in the same order as the file was
written. This is analogues to cassette tapes: you play music in the same
order as it was recorded.
Unlike the sequential files, you can have random-access to files in any
order you want. Think of data in a random-access file as being similar to
songs on compact disc (CD): you can go directly to any song you want to
play without having to play or fast-forward through the other songs.
9.4.1: Sequential File Concepts
You can perform three operations on sequential disk files. You can create
disk files, add to disk files, and read from disk files.
9.4.1.1: Opening and Closing Sequential Files
When you open a disk file, you only have to inform C++, the file name
and what you want to do with it. C++ and your operating system work
together to make sure that the disk is ready, and they create an entry in
your file directory for the filename (if you are creating a file). When you close a file, C++ writes any remaining data to the file, releases the file from
the program, and updates the file directory to reflect the file’s new size.
You can use either of the two methods to open a file in C++:
using a Constructor or
using the open function
The following C++ statement will create an object with the name fout of
ofstream class and this object will be associated with file name “hello.txt”.

ofstream fout (“hello.txt”) //create hello.txt in your directory file
This statement uses the constructor method.
The following C++ statement will create an object with the name fout of
ofstream class and this object will be associated with file name “hello.txt”.
ofstream fout
fout.open(“hello.txt”) //create hello.txt in your current directory
The code will create hello text file as shown below

If you open a file for writing (out access mode), C++ creates the file. If a
file by that name already exists, C++ overwrite the old file with no
warning. You must be careful when opening files not to overwrite existing
data that you want.
If an error occurs during opening of a file, C++ does not create a valid file
pointer (file object). Instead, C++ creates a file pointer (object) equal to
zero. For example if you open a file for output, but use an invalid disk
name, C++ can’t open the file and therefore makes the file object equal to
zero.
You can also determine the file access mode when creating a file in C++. If
you want to use the open function to open a file then the syntax is:
fileobject.open(filename,accessmode)
File name is a string containing a valid file name for your computer.
Accessmode is the sought operation to be taken on the file and must be one of the values in the following table.

9.4 የፋይል አጠቃቀም አይነቶች (Types of Disk File Access)
​ፕሮግራማችን ፋይሎችን በሁለት መንገድ ሊያገኛቸው ይችላል፡
​ሰርተህ ተከተል (Sequential Access): ዳታው በተቀመጠበት ቅደም ተከተል ብቻ ማንበብ። ልክ እንደ ካሴት ማለት ነው፤ መጀመሪያ የተቀዳውን ሳትሰማ መሃል ላይ ያለውን መስማት አትችልም።
​የፈለጉበት ጋር መዝለል (Random Access): ዳታውን በፈለግከው ቅደም ተከተል ማግኘት። ይሄ ደግሞ እንደ ሲዲ (CD) ነው፤ የፈለግከውን ዘፈን መርጠህ በቀጥታ ማጫወት ትችላለህ።
​9.4.1 ሰርተህ ተከተል ፋይሎች (Sequential File Concepts)
​በእነዚህ ፋይሎች ላይ ሶስት ነገሮችን ማድረግ ትችላለህ፡ አዲስ ፋይል መፍጠር፣ ዳታ መጨመር እና ከፋይሉ ላይ ዳታ ማንበብ።
​9.4.1.1 ፋይሎችን መክፈትና መዝጋት
​አንድን ፋይል ስትከፍት ለ C++ የምትነግረው ሁለት ነገር ብቻ ነው፡ የፋይሉን ስም እና ምን ማድረግ እንደፈለግክ። ፋይሉን ስትዘጋው ደግሞ C++ የቀረ ዳታ ካለ ፋይሉ ላይ ጽፎ ያጠናቅቃል፣ እንዲሁም ፋይሉን ከፕሮግራሙ ጋር ያላቅቀዋል።
​ፋይል ለመክፈት ሁለት መንገዶች አሉ፦
1, በኮንስትራክተር (Constructor) መጠቀም፦
ofstream fout ("hello.txt") // ፋይሉን ወዲያውኑ ይፈጥረዋል
የ open() ፋንክሽንን መጠቀም፦
ofstream fout
fout.open("hello.txt") // መጀመሪያ ኦብጀክቱን ፈጥሮ በኋላ ፋይሉን ይከፍታል
ጥንቃቄ ማድረግ ያለባችሁ ነገሮች፦
​Overwrite: ፋይል ለመጻፍ (out mode) ስትከፍት፣ በዚያ ስም ሌላ ፋይል ቀድሞ ካለ C++ ያለምንም ማስጠንቀቂያ አጥፍቶ በአዲሱ ይተካዋል። ስለዚህ ጥንቃቄ አድርግ!
​Error Handling: ፋይሉ ሳይከፈት ቢቀር (ለምሳሌ የዲስክ ስም ከተሳሳተ)፣ የፈጠርከው ኦብጀክት ዋጋው 0 (zero) ይሆናል። ይሄ ፋይሉ አልተከፈተም ማለት ነው።
​የፋይሉን አጠቃቀም አይነት (Access mode) ለመወሰን የምንጠቀምበት ሲንታክስ (Syntax) እንዲህ ነው፦
​fileobject.open(filename, accessmode)



outdata.open(“c:\\names.txt”,ios::app)
outdata.open(“c:\\names.txt”,ios::in)
outdata.open(“c:\\names.txt”,ios::out)
You should always check for the successful opening of a file before
starting file manipulation on it. You use the fail() function to do the task:
Lets have an example here:
ifstream indata
indata.open(“c:\\myfile.txt”,ios::in)
if(indata.fail())
{
//error description here
}
In this case, the open operation will fail (i.e the fail function will return
true), if there is no file named myfile.txt in the directory C:\
After you are done with your file manipulations, you should use the close
function to release any resources that were consumed by the file
operation. 
Here is an example
indata.close()
The above close() statement will terminate the relationship between the
ifstream object indata and the file name “c:\myfile.txt”, hence releasing
any resource needed by the system.
የፋይል አከፋፈት አይነቶች (Access Modes)
​እነዚህን ምሳሌዎች ተመልከት፡
​outdata.open("c:\\names.txt", ios::app)
​ios::app (Append): ፋይሉ ካለ መጨረሻው ላይ አዲስ መረጃ ለመጨመር ይጠቅማል። የቆየውን ዳታ አያጠፋብህም።
​outdata.open("c:\\names.txt", ios::in)
​ios::in (Input): ከፋይሉ ላይ መረጃ ለማንበብ ብቻ ስትፈልግ።
​outdata.open("c:\\names.txt", ios::out)
​ios::out (Output): በፋይሉ ላይ መረጃ ለመጻፍ። ፋይሉ ቀድሞ ካለ ግን ያጠፋውና በአዲስ ይተካዋል።
​ፋይሉ በትክክል መከፈቱን ማረጋገጥ
​ፋይል ላይ ማንኛውንም ስራ ከመስራትህ በፊት፣ ፋይሉ በትክክል መከፈቱን ማረጋገጥ በጣም አስፈላጊ ነው። ለዚህ ደግሞ fail() የምትባል ፋንክሽን እንጠቀማለን።
​ለምሳሌ፡
ifstream indata
indata.open("c:\\myfile.txt", ios::in)

if(indata.fail())
{
// ፋይሉ ካልተገኘ ወይም መከፈት ካልቻለ እዚህ ጋር ማሳሰቢያ መጻፍ ትችላለህ
cout << "Error: ፋይሉ ሊገኝ አልቻለም!" << endl
}
እዚህ ጋር ፋይሉ (myfile.txt) በሲ-ድራይቭ (C:) ውስጥ ከሌለ፣ fail() ፋንክሽኑ true (እውነት) የሚል መልስ ይሰጠናል። ይህም ስህተት መኖሩን ያሳውቀናል።
​ፋይልን መዝጋት (Closing a File)
​የፈለግከውን ስራ ሰርተህ ስትጨርስ፣ የከፈትከውን ፋይል መዝጋት አለብህ። ይሄም ኮምፒውተሩ ለዛ ፋይል የተጠቀመውን ሜሞሪ (resources) እንዲለቅ ይረዳዋል።
​ምሳሌ፡
indata.close()
ይህንን ስታደርግ በ indata ኦብጀክት እና በ myfile.txt መካከል የነበረው ግንኙነት ያበቃል።